# Lecture 02: Rust Basics

## Roadmap

We will talk about how Rust does the memory management and how it helps us to
avoid memory leaks and race conditions.

## Intro

Question:
* How does memory leak happen?
* How do you avoid memory leaks in Java?
* How do you avoid memory leaks in C, C++?
* What can happen if we have concurrent reads and writes to shared variables?

### Stack and Heap

Let's use a string to demonstrate how it is stored in memory. (See lecture note)

What about we assign it to a different variable? (See lecture note)

Having multiple stack parts pointing to a same heap tends to cause issues, e.g.,
double free, use-after-free, and race conditions.

## Compile time checking: Ownership!

1. Every value (heap) has a variable that is its owner (stack).
2. There can be only one owner at a time.
3. When the owner goes out of scope, the value is dropped.

Let's use `cargo` to try some examples. Cargo is Rust's build system and package
manager.

```bash
# on ece machines
cargo --version
cargo new hello_rust
cd hello_rust
```

```rust
// rule 1
fn main() {
    // s is the owner of the value "Hello world"
    let s = String::from("Hello world");
}
```

```rust
// rule 2
fn main() {
    let s = String::from("Hello world");
    let s1 = s;
    let s2 = s;
    // we can't have more than one owner!
    println!("s1={}, s2={}", s1, s2);
}
```

```rust
// rule 3
fn main() {
    println!("start!");

    {
        let s = String::from("Hello world");
        println!("{}", s);
    }   // s goes out of scope and is dropped

    println!("{}", s);  // error!
}
```

## Move or Copy

By default, Move semantics is used to transfer ownership from one variable to
another. (See lecture note)

Use `.clone()` if you want the Copy semantics.

```rust
fn main() {
    let s = String::from("hello");
    let s1 = s;
    // let s1 = s.clone();

    println!("{s}");  // compile error!
}
```

Question: is the following code correct? Try run it yourself.

```rust
fn main() {
    let a = 10_000_000; // same as 10000000
    let b = a;
    println!("{a}");
}
```

See https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Copy.html

## Other

I'll skip other stuffs such as shadowing and immutability here. Read the lecture
note yourself.

# after-action, huanyi, 12Jan2024

This was maybe 40 minutes? I think I went slowly when covering the concepts.

Talked about the stack and heap.

Went through the rules and showed the examples. Also asked students to fix rule2
example.

Let students try the `10_000_000` example. Someone said that was "interesting".
