# Lecture 6 — Modern Processors

## Roadmap

We will talk about some techniques to speed up CPU execution

## Mini-lecture

CISC to RISC leads to impressive scaling on CPU frequency during a time, but, we
hit the wall eventually: clock speeds stop getting faster around 2005, stopping
at around 3 GHz. That's why we seek other techniques.

- Pipelining

This is straightforward I guess.

- Register renaming

```asm
MOV R2, R7 + 32
ADD R1, R2
MOV R2, R9 + 64 ; we can rename R2 to say RY
ADD R3, R2
```

- Speculation

```asm
ld  rax, rbx+16 ; assume cache miss
add rbx, 16     ; carry on anyway, ADD doesn’t need rax value from LD
                ; register renaming => LD (read rbx)/ADD (write to renamed rbx) don’t interfere
cmp rax, 0      ; needs rax value, queue till available
jeq null_chk    ; oops! need cmp result
                ; speculate: assume branch not taken
st  rbx-16, rcx ; speculatively store to store buf (not L1)
ld  rcx, rdx    ; unrelated cache miss: 2 misses now active, 1 speculative
ld  rax, rax+8  ; now must wait for result of first LD since we need rax
                ; but we still almost cut the time in half
```

## Calculation

### q1

Assume we can always find the data in L3 cache, cache miss rates are 40 per 1000
for L1D (L1 data) and 4 per 1000 for L2, and cache miss penalty are 5 cycles for
L1D and 300 cycles for L2, what is the average running time for an instruction?

### q2

Assume memory access takes 200 ns and a disk read 8 ms, what is roughly the access time
if you have a page fault?

(Answers are in the lecture note)

# After-action report, plam, 23Jan23

Talked about frequency scaling.

Pipelining: Put 5 instructions on post-it notes. First, had a student acting out
executing the stages of the instructions sequentially. Then, had 4 more students
come up, and acted out pipelining the instructions. Just a bit of chaos here.

Did an illustration of waiting for cache/working in the miss shadow.

Played 2.5 minutes each from the videos about Intel/Ryzen.

# after-action, huanyi, 22Jan2024

I showed the pipelining example from the lecture note, and talked about the two
code snippets.
