# Lecture 12 — Dependencies and Speculation

## Dependencies

Talk about loop-carried and memory-carried dependencies.

## Breaking Dependencies with Speculation

### Speculative Execution for Threads

Exercise: consider the following code, if you can create extra threads to
calculate the results of `long_calculation` and `second_long_calculation`, how
can you speed up the code potentially?

```rust
fn do_work(x: i32, y: i32, threshold: i32) -> i32 {
    let val = long_calculation(x, y);
    if val > threshold {
        return val + second_long_calculation(x, y);
    }
    return val;
}
```

Question: when is your modified code faster? When is it slower? How could you
improve the use of threads?

### Value Speculation

Exercise: consider the following code, if you can somehow predict the result of
`long_calculation`, how can you speed up the code potentially?

```rust
fn do_other_work(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
    let val = long_calculation(x, y);
    return second_long_calculation(val);
}
```

Question: when is your modified code faster? When is it slower? How could you
improve the use of threads?

## Software Transactional Memory

The idea resembles database transactions. The code in the atomic block either
executes completely, or aborts/rolls back in the event of a conflict with
another transaction (which triggers a retry later on, and repeated retries if
necessary to get it applied).

### Benefits

- simple programming model.

### Problems

- Rollback is key to STM. But, some things cannot be rolled back. (write to the
  screen, send packet over network)
- Nested transactions.
- Limited transaction size. Most implementations (especially all-hardware) have
  a limited transaction size.
- Currently slow, but a lot of research is going into improving it.
- Intermediate states may still become visible in real implementation. (Maybe
  this doesn't happen in the Rust implementation because of fearless
  concurrency, but it certainly can in C/C++ versions of STM.)
