# Lecture 17 — Compiler Optimizations

## Roadmap

We will talk about compiler optimizations, specifically, scalar optimizations,
loop optimizations, and link-time optimizations.

## Question

* How do you enable compiler optimization in `cargo`?
* Which profile will it use when you call `cargo build` or `cargo build
  --release`?

(Answers are in [cargo default
profiles](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/profiles.html#default-profiles))

## Scalar Optimization (Non-Array Optimization)

Activity: try to find all the optimizations you can apply to this code. You can
refer to the lecture notes to do this.

```rust
pub fn add(c: i32, d: i32, y: i32, z: i32) -> (i32, i32, i32) {
    let a = (c + d) * y;
    let b = (c + d) * z;
    let w = 3;
    let x = f(w);
    let y = x;
    let z = w + y;
    return (a, b, z);
}

pub fn g() -> i32 {
    if f(5) % 2 == 0 {
        10
    } else {
        5
    }
}

pub fn f(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x * 2
}
```

Then use <https://godbolt.org/> to explore how compiler works. Also try to
switch to an old version of compiler (e.g., 1.50.0) and see the differences.
(add `-C overflow-checks=n` so that overflow checking is disabled)

## Loop Optimization

* Induction variable elimination: find and eliminate loop induction variables
  which are computable from the primary induction variable
* Scalar replacement: replaces an array read `a[i]` occuring multiple times with
  a single read `temp = a[i]` and references to `temp`
* Eliminate array bounds checks (not in idiomatic Rust because we would usually
  iterate on an `IntoIterator`)
* Loop unrolling: less branches, enable *software pipelining*, useful for SIMD,
  etc. (An example in `flipped/L17/loop_unrolling/`)
* Loop interchange: changes the nesting of loops to coincide with the ordering
  of array elements in memory, giving big wins for caches. (Question: Why
  sometimes we want to do things the column-major way? Hint: page faults)
* Loop fusion or loop fission
* Loop-invariant code motion

## Interprocedural Analysis and Link-Time Optimization (LTO)

```toml
[profile.release]
lto = true
```

Talk about *alias analysis* and *pointer analysis*. Remember a heap region can
be pointed by multiple variables. (less of an issue for Rust but it can be one
for other languages)

### Call graphs and Devirtualization

Activity: try to build the call graph of the code. What possible optimization
you can think of from the call graph?

```rust
fn flag() -> bool { true }

fn main() {
    let mut to: &dyn Foo = &Bar;
    if flag() {
        to = &Baz;
    }
    to.foo();
}

trait Foo {
    fn foo(&self) -> i32;
}

struct Bar;
impl Foo for Bar {
    fn foo(&self) -> i32 {
        println!("bar");
        0
    }
}

struct Baz;
impl Foo for Baz {
    fn foo(&self) -> i32 {
        println!("baz");
        1
    }
}
```

A full example is in `flipped/L17/interprocedural`. The above code is just to
show the idea.


### Inlining

```rust
// try this on https://godbolt.org with `-C overflow-checks=n -C opt-level=1`
pub fn try_inline(x: i32) -> i32 {
    f(x)
}

#[inline(never)]
// ^ try change this to `#[inline(always)]`
pub fn f(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x * x
}
```

Question: what are the advantages and disadvantages of inlining? (worth a longer
discussion)

### Tail Recursion Elimination

```rust
pub fn fibonacci(n: u64) -> u64 {
    fn fibonacci_lr(n: u64, a: u64, b: u64) -> u64 {
        match n {
            0 => a,
            _ => fibonacci_lr(n - 1, a + b, a),
        }
    }
    fibonacci_lr(n, 1, 0)
}
```

## Link-Time Optimizations

Biggest challenge is the **scalability**!

Question: why is scalability the biggest challenge? Think about what parts are
parallelizable and what are not in interprocedural optimizations. Also, think
about what are the implementation challenges even though you have good global
decisions?

# After-action report, plam, 3 Mar 2023

The scalar optimization example works well with students finding examples.
Used slides for loop optimizations. Showed call graph. Started talking about LTO.

# After-action report, plam, 6 Mar 2023

Gave out cookies.

Showed an alias analysis/side effect analysis example on the board.
Lectured about link-time optimization. Did a discussion of inlining
with some audience participation. Did not talk about tail recursion elimination.

# After-action report, huanyi, 12Feb24

I went through all the things, but by just giving lectures. I didn't do the
living coding since RustExplorer does not work for it anymore. I didn't do
Stream VByte activity, either.
