# Lecture 19 — Query Optimization

## Roadmap

We will talk about optimizing database queries.

## Intro

Context; high-level steps of executing an assignment/query.

## Query optimization activity

Activity: inside `flipped/L19`, there are two tables, `customer` and `orders`. I
would like to know

* Names of customers who live in New York and who have at least one order with
  over 5000 dollars.

(Can students express this in SQL-like language? Do we use a subquery or join?)

My query after parsing and translation is (*query execution plan*)

* scan `customer` table then do a join (assuming [nested loop
  join](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nested_loop_join) to make it simple) with
  `orders` table using `customer_id`
* filter records where `city = "New York"`
* filter records where `purchase_amount > 5000`
* return `distinct customer_name` of those records

How do you optimize the query?

* only look at the tables?
* what if we have an index? Is it usable?
* how about making use of the statistics?

Question: what is the overhead of optimization?

## Measurement and estimation

We have had an activity where we estimate travel time from Waterloo to Montreal
and to SF before, so we won't do it again.

Anyway, same thing for estimating query execution time. What are the numbers of
interest here?

* disk access time
* CPU time (ignored for simplicity but actually important)

Complicating factors:

* system load
* buffer contents
* data layout

etc.

Activity on the board: estimate cost of select/join from "Alternative Routes".

## Estimating Statistics

It's mostly, though not completely, disk access that takes time.

What are things that might be available in metadata? (see lecture notes)

Talk about tradeoff in maintaining metadata, and histograms.

## Join Elimination

```SQL
SELECT c.* FROM customer AS c JOIN address AS a ON c.address_id = a.address_id;
```

The above `join` can be eliminated if there is a foreign key from customer's
address_id to the address id field and nulls are not permitted; this means that
there is always an address for each customer.

(Go through the other examples in lecture notes too).

## Evaluation Plan Selection

* Focus on the `join` operation
* Generating alternatives
* Nested subqueries

## Guidelines

* Do stuff early
* Set limits
* Plan caching

## Other

https://wizardzines.com/comics/explain/

# After-action report, plam, 10 Mar 2023

Just did this lecture today; did not reach L20. Mostly lecture plus the
interactive activities here. Did not do the "Alternative Routes" activity.

# After-action report, huanyi, 16Feb24

Mainly the query optimization activity. Very briefly talked about other stuffs.
