# L22 GPUs (kernel side)

## Roadmap

This lecture is about understanding how to write GPU kernels. We have an
exercise which will, I hope, help you get a better feel for warmup time; an
active data parallelism exercise; and live coding about kernels.

## Warm-up overheads [5 minutes]

This exercise works on your own or with a partner.

1. How long does it take to get from Parliament Hill in Ottawa to Gare Centrale
in Montreal? Estimate the time by car and by plane. Assume that you are driving
from Parliament Hill to the Ottawa airport and also from Montreal Trudeau
airport to Gare centrale. Don't forget that you have to clear security and be
there on time to board.

2. Same question, but from the Davis Centre at the University of Waterloo to the
Ferry Building in San Francisco. To keep things simple, let's say that you are
taking a taxi or rideshare to and from the airport.

(I have actual numbers for getting to Montreal Trudeau and back here from
Waterloo from last week.)

## Live coding: kernels (10 minutes)

What I'll do:
* show the simple sum kernel and run it
* live-code the N-body code and show the compiled kernel.

## Data parallelism (10 minutes)

* discuss: private memory / local memory (shared within work-group) / global &
  texture memory (whiteboard) / constant memory (whiteboard, written in
  Sharpie).

TODO: find a better example, maybe the password cracking example from L24.

Project the N-body problem code from L22. Each student is a work-item. Assign a
grid number to each student on the 2D grid induced by the classroom layout. So,
of course, each student runs a thread. You can pick your inputs arbitrarily,
just do the calculation. Group into blocks. Blocks share memory. Only some
number of students can run simultaneously (limited by GPU characteristics).

## Guided discussion: writing a kernel well (15 minutes)

Run through the discussion in the L22 notes under "Writing a kernel well" and
collectively develop the points there.

[Note: went a bit long]

