# Lecture 23 — Password Cracking, Bitcoin Mining

## Roadmap

There are two things from the recorded lecture that I want to underline:
password storage, and Bitcoin mining. Then, the classroom exercises will be
about using and computing rainbow tables.

## Rant 1: Password storage [5 minutes]

* Best practice: federated login (e.g. Google, Waterloo ADFS).
* Worst practice: storing passwords in plaintext.

You don't want to show up in [haveibeenpwned.com](https://haveibeenpwned.com).
Not storing data (and not forcing your users to store passwords) is best. But if
you must, don't store in plaintext. Salt your salads and your encrypted
passwords.

## Creating rainbow tables [25 minutes]

I've created Python file "hash-and-reduce.py" which does almost the thing in
"[How Rainbow Tables Work](https://kestas.kuliukas.com/RainbowTables)" by
Kuliukas; it operates on 7-digit numbers instead of 6-digit numbers, but
otherwise it's the same. That is, it takes a 7-digit number (e.g., to give it a
real world context, a phone number) as command-line input and outputs the MD5sum
and the reduction, which is another 7-digit number obtained from the MD5sum. A
real rainbow table also uses different reduction functions at different
positions on chains, but we won't do that here for simplicity.

* Your task: run "hash-and-reduce.py" on an input of your choice through 10
cycles and report the initial plaintext and final hash. Imagine how a GPU can do
this efficiently. Come up and write your plaintext and hash on the board.

## Using rainbow tables [20 minutes]

OK, now we have information about some precomputed hash chains (a simpler
version of rainbow tables). Let's use it to reverse the hash for an input. I
will do an example and then you can try one.

Let's say that you have a hash that you want to lookup the plaintext for. We'll
assume that it's one of the plaintexts that is in our table. How do you get the
hash you want to lookup? For the purpose of this exercise, take one of your
plaintexts and hash it.

OK, so now you have a hash that you want to reverse. But the hash function is
one-way. So you repeatedly reduce it and hash it and (given your choice of hash)
you'll eventually encounter one of the final hashes.

* How many times do you need to do this before you can give up?

OK, now you have a final hash that matches. Start with the initial plaintext and
run through until you hit the hash that you're trying to reverse, to check that
you didn't have a false positive collision. The thing just before that is the
plaintext you're looking for.

## Rant 2: Bitcoin mining [5 minutes]

Ugh, bitcoin. Funny how bitcoin still has to interact with the normal banking
system through trusted intermediaries. And NFTs seem to be getting stolen often,
litigated in the courts, and again depend on trusted intermediaries. Anyway,
energy using is horrific; and, Proof-Of-Stake just doesn't seem to happen, and
results in rich-get-richer. Why not just use a database?

Anyway, the lecture develops the concept of going beyond GPUs and using custom
hardware to mine Bitcoin.

# After-action report, plam, 27 Feb 2023

I did the rainbow table exercise and realized that it wasn't as clear as it
could be. After lecture, I rewrote the rainbow table exercise to clarify it. I
did talk about Bitcoins, although the popularity of NFTs has waned now at least,
and Ethereum has moved to proof-of-stake.

# After-action report, huanyi, 08Mar24

I talked about the best practice and worst practice. I also tried my email on
haveibeenpwned.com and it got the "no pwnage found" good news. I talked about
why we need memory-hard algorithms. For rainbow table, I did the exercise in its
easiest form, without collisions nor different reducing steps.
