# L24 GPU Applications; rants about passwords and bitcoins

## Roadmap

There are two things from the recorded lecture that I want to underline: password storage,
and Bitcoin mining. Then, the classroom exercises will be about using and computing
rainbow tables.

## Rant 1: Password storage [5 minutes]

* Best practice: federated login (e.g. Google, Waterloo ADFS).
* Worst practice: storing passwords in plaintext.

You don't want to show up in [haveibeenpwned.com](https://haveibeenpwned.com). Not storing
data (and not forcing your users to store passwords) is best. But if you must, don't store in plaintext.
Salt your salads and your encrypted passwords.

## Creating rainbow tables [10 minutes]

I've created Python file "hash-and-reduce.py" which does almost the
thing in "[How Rainbow Tables
Work](https://kestas.kuliukas.com/RainbowTables)" by Kuliukas; it
operates on 7-digit numbers instead of 6-digit numbers, but otherwise
it's the same. That is, it takes a 7-digit number (e.g. a phone
number) as command-line input and outputs the MD5sum and the
reduction, which is another 7-digit number obtained from the MD5sum.

* Your task: run "hash-and-reduce.py" on an input of your choice
through 10 cycles and report the initial plaintext and final hash.
Imagine how a GPU can do this efficiently. Come up and write your
plaintext and hash on the board.

## Using rainbow tables [10 minutes]

OK, now we have a rainbow table. Let's use it to reverse the hash 
for an input. I will do an example and then you can try one.

Pick a plaintext that you know shows up in one of the chains.
Keep on doing the hash-and-reduce thing to it. 

* How many times do you need to do this before you can give up?

OK, now you have a final hash that matches. Start with the initial
plaintext and run through until you hit the hash that you're
trying to reverse. The thing just before that is the plaintext
you're looking for.

## Rant 2: Bitcoin mining [5 minutes]

Ugh, bitcoin. Funny how bitcoin still has to interact with the normal
banking system through trusted intermediaries. And NFTs seem to be
getting stolen often, litigated in the courts, and again depend on
trusted intermediaries.  Anyway, energy using is horrific; and,
Proof-Of-Stake just doesn't seem to happen, and results in
rich-get-richer. Why not just use a database?

Anyway, the lecture develops the concept of going beyond GPUs and
using custom hardware to mine Bitcoin.


