# Lecture 25 — Profiling: Observing Operations

## Roadmap

We'll do a flashback from Lecture 1 (Computers are Fast) and then we are going
to do two in-class exercises: one on ad-hoc profiling and one on using perf
record/perf annotate/perf flamegraph.

## Computers Are Fast (5 minutes)

Normally I'd do this quiz by Julia Evans in Lecture 1, but we weren't meeting in
person then, so we'll do it now.

[Computers are Fast](https://computers-are-fast.github.io/)

What surprised you most?

## Intro, observations of our program

- **Counters** are, well, a stored count of the occurrences of something: how
  many times we had a cache miss, how many times we called foo(), how many times
  a user logged in, etc.
- **Traces** are recordings that show the sequence of events that the program is
  doing, so we can understand the runtime behaviour and how we got to the state
  we are in.
- **Profiles** are higher-level overviews of what the program is doing, where
  time is going in aggregate, and how long certain operations take.

(we will talk about Counters and Traces here, and Profiles in the next note)

## Perf and flamegraphs live demo (20 minutes)

The live demo is the code in `lectures/live-coding/L25/math`. It should work on
ecetesla0.

```
$ cargo build
$ perf record target/debug/math
$ perf report
$ perf annotate
```

We can do the same to the release version. Note that the `debug = true` flag
(controlling the amount of debug information) is set in [profile.release]. We
may notice latest compiler seems to eliminate functions other than `main()`.

`make` runs the Makefile which generates the flamegraph. We can look at the
flamegraph for the ad-hoc profiling example above, as well. That will probably
be a better flamegraph.

## Ad-Hoc Profiling (40 minutes)

OK, try to use `perf` on [imager](https://github.com/imager-io/imager).

We are going to practice ad-hoc profiling. I suspect that a single routine is
responsible for all of the runtime. `perf` can tell you this quite easily, but
it's good to have the skill of setting up a timer as well.

You can download any jpeg from the Internet and use it as a workload or simply
use the [benchmarks](https://github.com/colbyn/imager-bench-2019-11-2) imager
used

> target/release/imager --inputs [input.jpg] --output-file [some different
> filename.jpg]

Note: imager is complicated to compile because it requires webp devel libs,
which are currently not installed on ecetesla machines. Docker might be the
easiest way to compile imager. Try
[oxipng](https://github.com/shssoichiro/oxipng) instead. This will take a while
(it's the hackathon effect). You can also try flamegraphs on oxipng.

# After-action report, plam, 17 Mar 2023

This year, did not do "computers are fast" here because did it in L1.

* perf and flamegraph worked on ecetesla1 this year. Good to check before class.
  Did live demos.
* did not do ad-hoc profiling, to get through lectures faster. imager currently
  compiles on ece machines. Did talk about it. I think it could work if there
  was a bunch of time.

# After-action report, huanyi, 11Mar24

I did the "computers are fast" activity and also a demo of `perf` but did not do
the ad-hoc profiling exercise. In fact, the live demo and ad-hoc content seem to
be more relevent for L27.
