# Lecture 27 — Program Profiling and Profile Guided Optimization (POGO)

## Roadmap

Two exercises: one for dtrace and one for profiler guided optimization.

## Intro (5 minutes)

Two common categories:
- sampling-based, such as `perf`
- instrumentation-based, or probe-based/predicate-based, such as `dtrace`

## dtrace (10 minutes)

(There is a L27_old.md for systemtap, but I only made `dtrace` to work.)

Here is the dtrace doc:
<https://illumos.org/books/dtrace/chp-intro.html#chp-intro-3>

> DTrace probes come from a set of kernel modules called providers, each of
> which performs a particular kind of instrumentation to create probes. When you
> use DTrace, each provider is given an opportunity to publish the probes it can
> provide to the DTrace framework

list all of the available probes

```sh
sudo dtrace -l
```

Let's try a small D script/program (also in flipped/L26). The `dtrace:::BEGIN`,
`profile:::tick-1sec` (check out the [profile
provider](<https://illumos.org/books/dtrace/chp-profile.html#chp-profile>)), and
`dtrace:::END` are probes. Code in the bracket represents action statements. The
`trace` is the most basic data recording action.

```
/*
 * Count off and report the number of seconds elapsed
 */
dtrace:::BEGIN
{
	i = 0;
}

profile:::tick-1sec
{
	i = i + 1;
	trace(i);
}

dtrace:::END
{
	trace(i);
}
```

To run it

```sh
sudo dtrace -s flipped/L27/counter.d
```

DTrace instrumentation is designed to be as efficient as possible, see the
following quote:

> The instrumentation for each probe is performed dynamically on the live
> running operating system or on user processes you select. The system is not
> quiesced or paused in any way, and instrumentation code is added only for the
> probes that you enable. As a result, the probe effect of using DTrace is
> limited to exactly what you ask DTrace to do: no extraneous data is traced, no
> one big “tracing switch” is turned on in the system, and all of the DTrace
> instrumentation is designed to be as efficient as possible. These features
> enable you to use DTrace in production to solve real problems in real time.


It should be possible to count the number of system calls to create threads.
However, I haven't figured out what it is on apple silicon chip. On Linux, if
you run your program under `strace`, it'll tell you what syscalls you're
invoking (and their arguments).

## Profiler Guided Optimization (35 minutes)

Students should be able to install rust with rustup and apply the "A Complete
Cargo Workflow" steps at
[https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/profile-guided-optimization.html] to the A4
starter code. I observed a noticeable speedup.

I should rerun this with hyperfine, but I was getting times of 16.8s, 21.3s, and
19.2s with the starter code and arguments `target/release/lab4 100 100 50000`.
Then I ran the profile generation code with the same args and it took 2m30; I
ran it once more with `100 100 5000` to collect some more data, quickly. Then,
recompiling using the profile data gave 14.7s, 14.5s, and 15.7s. The workflow
was pretty much exactly the same as in the Complete Cargo Workflow.

# After-action report, huanyi, 15Mar24

I tried `dtrace` but I think there should be an example where we can use it to
trace our own programs, such as by taking advantage of
<https://github.com/oxidecomputer/usdt>. I talked about PGO but only asked
students to try `cargo-pgo` (<https://github.com/Kobzol/cargo-pgo>).
