# Lecture 28 — Causal and Memory Profiling

## Roadmap

We'll briefly talk about Coz, then we'll experiment with using DHAT and Massif
on the Lab 4 code.

## Coz

A causal profiler which does a what-if analysis on multi-thread programs. It
approach to measure potential speedup on latency is:

> Each time `f` runs in one thread, all other threads pause for 40% of `f`’s
> original execution time

Note that the thread that is paused does not need to call functions other than
`f`, it can be in a state executing `f` when gets paused.

It can also measure the potential effect of optimizations on throughput,
checkout [the paper](<https://arxiv.org/pdf/1608.03676v1.pdf>) for more details.

It is cool that we have a Rust wrapper for it
<https://github.com/plasma-umass/coz/tree/master/rust>.

## DHAT [20 minutes]

Here's the instructions for DHAT:
[https://valgrind.org/docs/manual/dh-manual.html]. (There's also the dhat-rs
crate: [https://docs.rs/dhat/latest/dhat/], but that's a bit harder to use, but
it's supposed to be faster). Run DHAT on your Lab 4 code.

Remember, you want

```
[profile.release]
debug = true
```

in your Cargo.toml. Hint: ecetesla2 is super slow, so if you run it with
parameters "5 5 5 5 5" it'll finish in about 2 minutes on that computer. I've
put the `dh_view.html` code at <https://patricklam.ca/tmp/dh_view.html>, or you
can try <https://nnethercote.github.io/dh_view/dh_view.html>, but you can also
copy it to your local machine from `/usr/libexec/valgrind` on the machine where
you run DHAT as well. You can run it with bigger numbers on, for instance,
ecetesla3.

## Massif [20 minutes]

Compile `live-coding/L28/alloc` and run it with `valgrind --tool=massif
target/release/alloc`. There will not be any useful output, but instead we can
find a `massif.out.[PID]` file. Use `ms_print` to read it.

Now try Massif and valgrind with your Lab 4.

We'll talk about what you've found. I've done it with the skeleton code.

# After-action report, plam, 20 March 2023

DHAT works, and students can successfully run it, but it is super slow on Lab 4
code. I would recommend getting it started at the beginning of class. You might
get responses on the ecetesla computer 20-30 minutes afterwards. The exercise
maybe takes 10 minutes to get started.

DHAT gives the wrong result if you run it on cargo run. You need to give the
binary itself.

Showed a demo of Massif but didn't have students do it themselves.


# After-action report, huanyi, 15Mar24

I talk about `coz`. I referred to the picture in the lecture note to talk about
how it does the what-if analysis. I will talk about memory profiling in the next
class.

# After-action report, huanyi, 18Mar24

Did the DHAT and Massif demos and talked about their outputs.
