# Lecture 29 — Liar, Liar

## Roadmap

I won't actually do "lies from metrics" as it was done in lecture, but I'll ask
students to compile the code from
[https://pvk.ca/Blog/2014/10/19/performance-optimisation-~-writing-an-essay/]
and run perf for themselves.

```
gcc -g -DTLB -DFENCE -O3 cycle.c
perf record ./a.out
perf annotate -s cache_misses
```

(Ideally we may want to change the code to remove the -DTLB)

We resume the video-first delivery at "Lies from Counters" and continue doing
exercises from there.

## Lies from averaging [2 minutes]

We'll just quickly distribute numbers to students and calculate an average to
show that averages lie. For example, we distribute a number from 1 to 10 every
second; however, we sample it every 3 seconds. It is easy to tell that the
average of sampled numbers (6) is higher than the actual average (5.5).

## Sampling vs tracing [2 minutes]

We can illustrate a tracing-based approach (beyond what we saw with systemtap)
by counting to 20 and instrumenting every even number (tracing) versus sampling
every 2 seconds. Which gives more accurate average?

# After-action report, plam, 20 Mar 2023

I ran the code from the blog post and talked about it. I could not get perf
annotate to work for me. You need to provide one of -DTLB or -DDIV or it will
crash with an alignment error.

We talked about averaging and sampling, but we didn't actually do the exercises.
I presented the long tail slides.

# After-action report, huanyi, 18Mar24

Perf works this time. However, the profiling result was different from the blog
and it was not so clear to me. More details are needed.

I added some details to make the "lies from averaging" activity clearer.
