# Lecture 32 — Convergence, Ergodicity, Applications

## Roadmap

Most of this content works better in video form, as it's a bit of an infodump.
I've looked for some exercises we can do.

## Convergence [5 minutes]

Let's do two simulations.

* expected value of a 6-sided die is 3.5. Let's roll a virtual die a bunch of
  times and see what is the average value we get.
* law of large numbers/central limit theorem, converges to a normal
  distribution: [https://rinaldi6109.github.io/CLT/]

## Tim and Enzo: simulation [10 minutes]

Here, try the below code on this page:
<https://www.khanacademy.org/computer-programming/new/pjs>

```JavaScript
var generator;
var standardDeviation;
var mean;

var mixh = function (a, b, v)
{
    return (1-v)*a + v*b;
};

var HSV2RGB = function(H, S, V)
{
    var V2 = V * (1 - S);
    var r  = ((H>=0 && H<=60) || (H>=300 && H<=360)) ? V : ((H>=120 && H<=240) ? V2 : ((H>=60 && H<=120) ? mixh(V,V2,(H-60)/60) : ((H>=240 && H<=300) ? mixh(V2,V,(H-240)/60) : 0)));
    var g  = (H>=60 && H<=180) ? V : ((H>=240 && H<=360) ? V2 : ((H>=0 && H<=60) ? mixh(V2,V,H/60) : ((H>=180 && H<=240) ? mixh(V,V2,(H-180)/60) : 0)));
    var b  = (H>=0 && H<=120) ? V2 : ((H>=180 && H<=300) ? V : ((H>=120 && H<=180) ? mixh(V2,V,(H-120)/60) : ((H>=300 && H<=360) ? mixh(V,V2,(H-300)/60) : 0)));

    return {
        r : Math.round(r * 255),
        g : Math.round(g * 255),
        b : Math.round(b * 255)
    };
};

var Walker = function() {
    this.x = 0;
    this.y = height/2;
    this.hue = 0;
};

Walker.prototype.display = function() {
    strokeWeight(3);
    var rgb = HSV2RGB(this.hue, 1, 1);
    stroke(rgb.r, rgb.g, rgb.b);
    this.hue = (this.hue + 1) % 360;
    point(this.x, this.y);
};

// Randomly move up, down, left, right, or stay in one place
Walker.prototype.walk = function() {
    var yStepSize = random(-2, 2);
    var xStepSize = 1;

    this.x += xStepSize;
    this.y += yStepSize;
};

Walker.prototype.drawAxis = function() {
    strokeWeight(0.5);
    stroke(0, 0, 0);
    line(0, height/2, width, height/2);
    point(this.x, this.y+10);
};

var w = new Walker();
w.drawAxis();

draw = function() {
    w.walk();
    w.display();
};
```

OK, here are some questions:
* what are the Tim and Enzo approaches in this situation?
* is there startup time in this system?
* is this process ergodic? (irreducible, positive recurrent, aperiodic)?

By the way, do you know of other things that are simulated using ensemble
averages?

## Name Your Own Queueing Theory Applications [10 mins]

We've talked about some abstract applications, but it's good to link queueing
theory to the real world. What are some example open systems? Closed systems?
With and without think time? Apply Little's Law to these systems (i.e. provide
estimates of two of three of: arrival rate λ, expected value of number of jobs
in system E[N], and expected time spent in system E[T]).

## M/M/1 [10 mins]

There is an example in the notes. Let's do an example with different numbers.
The Visa credit card network handles 65,000 transactions per second. This is not
actually on one server, but let's pretend it is. Let's say that a request takes
0.01ms to handle.

What is the:
* time to complete the average request T<sub>q</sub>?
* average length of the queue W?
* average number of jobs Q?
* probability that there are 2 jobs in the system at any time?
* probability that there are more than 3 jobs in the system at any time?

(What's the difference between W and Q?)

## M/M/k [15 mins]

OK, we can now pretend that the Visa network runs on 3 servers (to make the
calculations tractable by hand). What are T<sub>q</sub> and W now?

We can also do the printer example in the notes ourselves: base case, jobs
submitted every 2.5 minutes on average; service time 2 minutes. What are λ, ρ,
and T<sub>q</sub>?

OK, what about getting a printer that is twice as fast, and what about getting a
second printer? What can we conclude?

## Queueing for Performance [10 mins]

We can also work through one of these.

| Device   | Data/Hour | λ |    S | V |   ρ | V × S |
|----------|----------:|--:|-----:|--:|----:|------:|
| Webpages |     4 000 |   |      |   |     |       |
| CPU      |           |   |      |   | 50% |       |
| Disk 1   |    96 000 |   | 12ms |   |     |       |
| Disk 2   |    48 000 |   | 16ms |   |     |       |
| Network  |    22 000 |   | 30ms |   |     |       |

We can follow the steps in the notes, identify the bottleneck device (highest
ρ), and predict the maximum number of transactions we can serve, as well as the
average transaction time.

The notes talk about the case where the service times are unknown. We'll skip
that.

Note that the visitation ratio calculation of the CPU in the notes seems to be
outdated, since nowadays we have DMAs to handle data transfer.

# After-action report, plam, 27 Mar 2023

The rinaldi page is pretty slick but does take a while. There is still to talk
about, but the 5 minute estimate is not accurate. More like 10.

The Tim and Enzo simulation does work.

Queueing theory applications: We did a calculation and it actually worked out a
bit weird. It was Costco and I'm not exactly sure how to interpret that with
respect to shopping time and time in system.

The MM1 example works though there was a typo in the notes about the definition
of average number of jobs, now fixed.

I skipped the MMk example.

The queueing for performance example from the notes works.

I took the whole 80 minutes to do L32. That leaves us with 3 more 80-minute
lecture slots, the last one being for review/AMA. So L33, L34, L35 in the next
two slots.

By the way, here's a longer experiment that one could run on MM1.

https://witestlab.poly.edu/blog/average-queue-length-of-an-m-m-1-queue/


# After-action report, huanyi, 22Mar24

M/M/1 and above was covered by Jeff. Next class should start with the M/M/k
example.

# After-action report, huanyi, 25Mar24

I verified the M/M/k formulas and they look good, although it would be good to
have a complete re-write of the note.
