# L33 Applying Queueing Theory

## Roadmap

We'll think of some real-world applications and then work through examples.

## Name Your Own Queueing Theory Applications [10 mins]

We've talked about some abstract applications, but it's good to link
queueing theory to the real world.  What are some example open
systems? Closed systems? With and without think time? Apply Little's
Law to these systems (i.e. provide estimates of two of three of:
arrival rate λ, expected value of number of jobs in system E[N], and
expected time spent in system E[T]).

## M/M/1 [10 mins]

There is an example in the notes. Let's do an example with different numbers.
The Visa credit card network handles 65,000 transactions per second.
This is not actually on one server, but let's pretend it is. Let's say that a
request takes 0.01ms to handle. 

What is the:
* time to complete the average request T<sub>q</sub>?
* average length of the queue W?
* average number of jobs Q?
* probability that there are 2 jobs in the system at any time?
* probability that there are more than 3 jobs in the system at any time?

(What's the difference between W and Q?)

## M/M/k [15 mins]

OK, we can now pretend that the Visa network runs on 3 servers (to make the
calculations tractable by hand). What are T<sub>q</sub> and W now?

We can also do the printer example in the notes ourselves: 
base case, jobs submitted every 2.5 minutes; service time 2 minutes.
What are λ, ρ, and T<sub>q</sub>?

OK, what about getting a printer that is twice as fast, and what about getting a second printer?
What can we conclude?

## Queueing for Performance [10 mins]

We can also work through one of these.

| Device           | Data/Hour | λ | S | V | ρ | V × S |
|------------------|----------:|--:|--:|--:|--:|------:|
| Webpages         |    4 000  |   |   |   |   |       |
| CPU              |           |   |   |   | 50% |       |
| Disk 1           | 96 000    |   | 12ms  |   | |       |
| Disk 2           | 48 000    |   | 16ms  |   | |       |
| Network          | 22 000    |   | 30ms  |   | |       |

We can follow the steps in the notes, identify the bottleneck device (highest ρ),
and predict the maximum number of transactions we can serve, as well as the average transaction time.

The notes talk about the case where the service times are unknown. We'll skip that.