# Lecture 34 — DevOps: Configuration

## Roadmap

This is a bit of a weird lecture in person since the content is a video. We have
some exercises though. Context: how do you scale up web services from 1 user to
11+ million users, with stops along the way.

## Intro

The first episode of the YouTube series is a good introduction:
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLIivdWyY5sqJrKl7D2u-gmis8h9K66qoj>

Which I found from <https://github.com/upgundecha/howtheysre>

## Scalability

Now, onto actual questions about practical scaling and AWS.

When should you scale your system up?

## Web servers

What are the components that you need to run a website? We need to know this so
that we can split them up.

* frontend (web server)
* backend (database)

(You also need DNS services, but we can sort of ignore that for now).

Why do we need to do things to scale our system? (What are the bottlenecks?)
What have we seen with respect to how to scale? What are our options for scaling
web servers? What are the tradeoffs?

There's the general question of what you want to do yourself and what you want
to outsource e.g. to Amazon. Again, what are the tradeoffs?

I'll also mention microservices, which were perhaps a bit of a fad a few years
ago, but useful in moderation. When to use them?

There are two more things I'll mention: (1) sharding and (2) monitoring.
Sharding is like when you have exams and send all students A-G in one room and
H-J in another room. Monitoring plays right into the "don't guess, measure"
philosophy that we espouse throughout this course.

## AWS Questions

How to choose appropriate instance sizes and needs for your project in advance?
(Note the link to software requirements.)

AWS offers lots of similar things. How to choose which thing? How to ensure you
don't integrate several different things that do the same thing in your project?
(Why shouldn't you?)

How serious is the risk of vendor lock-in if you build your system on AWS?

Retrospectively re-inventing the wheel: If AWS launches a new service that does
something you've implemented, how do you know when/if it's time to switch?

Does the ease with which you can launch a new service and have it run forever
(or as long as your credit card is good) potentially open up a lot of security
issues? How can you mitigate this issue?

Is it concerning that 2-3 companies control so much of the Internet
infrastructure and could drop anyone as a client with essentially no
consequences? Has this happened for good/bad? How easy is it to replace one of
these companies?

# After-action report, plam, 31 Mar 2023

Had a discussion about scaling patricklam.ca. Students started looking at my
wildlife photography.

# After-action report, plam, 3 Apr 2023

We went through all the AWS questions (which aren't really discussed in the
notes). They are a good set of topics for discussion. Feels like a liberal arts
classroom.

# After-action report, huanyi, 1Apr24

We went through some of the questions. Maybe it was like 25 minutes on this
topic?
